FOOD-BASED
DIETARY GUIDELINE
FOR NIGERIA
A Guide to healthy eating
NUTRITION DIVISION
FEDERAL MINISTRY OF HEALTH
ABUJA ENGLISH
Reprinted 2006
WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
FOOD-BASED
DIETARY GUIDELINES
FOR NIGERIA
FEDERAL MINISTRY OF HEALTH
ABULIA IGERIA
REPRINT YEAR 2006
Preface
Acknowledgment
Working Group
1. Introduction.
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2. Justification for using Food-Based Approach
rather than RDAS or RNIs.
3. General Recommendations
4. Specific Recommendations.
Protein-Energy-Malnutrition.
Micronutrients Deficiencies.
Diet-related non-communicable diseases.
Page No
ii
iii
iv
1
5
6
10
10
16
23
PREFACE
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
The amount and type offood eaten is a fundamental determinant of human health. Diet is
The
 one
 International
 of the major factors now linked to a wide range of diseases. Conference on Nutrition (INC) jointly organised by FAO improving
and WHO


nutritional
in Rome in 1992 enunciated various strategies and actions for status of people throughout the world. The plan of action for Nutrition adopted at this important conference called on "Governments to provide advice to the public by disseminating through the use of mass media and other appropriate means, qualitative and/or quantitative relevant for different dietary guidelines age groups and lifestyles and appropriate for the country's population."
In Nigeria, malnutrition and the widespread prevalence diseases have been recognised of communicable as major health and welfare problems. Available
Malnutrition,
data have shown

 that a host of nutritional disorders such as Protein-Engery- Vitamin A deficiency, Iron deficiency anaemia and Iodine deficiency disorders among others are of public health importance. The growth of children and size of adults reflects the effects of diet, infection, psychosocial, and genetic factors.
stroke
Diseases
 and diabetes
 such as coronary heart disease, various cancers, hypertension,
identified as the
 have also been linked to diet. These conditions have been
including commonest causes of premature death in developing countries Nigeria especially among the affluent middle class.
for the
"Dietary
 population
 guidelines are sets of advisory statements that give dietary advice in order to promote overall nutritional well-being and to address all diet-related conditions."
recommended
The development
 as
 of food-based dietary guidelines for Nigeria has been
nutritional
 a suitable instrument for improving food consumption and well being.
as inadequate
The dietary guidelines address various causes of malnutrition such intake while making specific recommendations groups such for different age
as the elderly. as infants, children, adults, the pregnant and lactating mothers as well
DR. M. S.AMAESHI,
DIRECTOR,
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
AND POPULATIONACTIVITIES
FEDERALMINISTRY OF HEALTH
ii
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The development and printing of these guidelines have benefited enormously from the patient advice and moral support of the Director Community Development and Population Activities Dr. M. S. Amaeshi. We also express our sincere
development
 gratitude to our Consultants for sharing their extensive experience during the
Chika Ndiokwelu
 of these
 and Mallam
 guidelines. We thank Professor Tunde Oguntona, Dr. (Mrs) S. S. Hassan. The immense contributions of the members of Staff of the Nutrition Division especially
the final editing
 Mr. R. O. Osiyemi and Mrs. K. O. Demehin who were responsible for is also recognized.
for their
Additionally,
 contributions.
 we thank Dr. O. Bogunjoko and Miss P. Bozegha both of WHO
provided
Finally, We gratefully acknowledge the financial support and services by WHO Country Office in Nigeria.
DR. (MRS.) S. O. OMOJOKUN
Consultant Special Grade 1
Nutrition Division
Federal Ministry of Health
iii
WORKING GROUP
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Niger
FMOHWHOCONSULTANTSDr. M. S. Amaeshi
Dr. (Mrs) S. O. Omojokun Mrs. O. Y. Adeniji
Mrs. A. K. Orivri
Mrs. L. N. Mowoе
Mr. R. O. Osiyemi
Mrs. K. O. Demehin
Miss. R. R. Amodu
Miss F. R. Kia
Miss M. K. Onyemachi
Mrs. A. F. Akapo
Dr. O. Bogunjoko
Miss P. Bozegha
Prof. T. Oguntona
University of Agriculture, Abeokuta
Dr. (Mrs) C. Ndiokwelu
Dept. of Dietetics, U.N.T.H., Enugu
Mallam S. S. Hassan
Dept. of Community Health A.B.U., Zaria.
EDITORIAL COMMITTEE:
Professor T. Oguntona (Consultant) Dr. (Mrs) S. O. Omojokun Mr. R. O. Osiyemi
Mrs. K. O. Demehin
iv
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Nutritional and nutrition-related disorders continue to be a serious problem of public
the
 health importance in Nigeria with Protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) being commonest and most serious form of malnutrition. The Nigeria Demographic
were
and Health Survey (NDHS, 1990) indicated that 43% of children under five years stunted and in 1993, the UNICEF/OAU Participatory Information Collection
children
(PIC) study
 of
 recorded 53% stunting, 11% wasting and 36% underweight among
1993)
 the same age group. Also, the National Micronutrient Survey (NMS, recorded equally high prevalence rates for under-nutrition (40% stunting,
deficiencies.
23% wasting and 40% underweight), as well as specific micronutrient
the children
 62% of the women of child bearing age surveyed as well as 75% of
deficient. For
 were anaemic while one out of every 3 children was vitamin A
20%
 iodine deficiency disorders, an endemic goiter prevalence rate of
has
 was reported. Low birth weight, a good indicator of maternal malnutrition
with
 been
 malnutrition.
 put at 20% while 52% of all under-five deaths in Nigeria are associated
efforts,
While the

 problem of under-nutrition is yet to be contained with inspite of several
becoming
over-nutrition with resultant chronic degenerative diseases is slowly
rate
 a public health concern. Recent studies have recorded 40% prevalence
1997),
 for


There
obesity, 11.2% for hypertension and 2.2%, for Diabetes Mellitus (FMHSS,
types of cancer.
 is also increased incidence of coronary heart disease and various
affluent middle
 Though a smaller percentage of the population (mainly the urban
the core of decision
 class) are affected, these are a very important few that constitute makers who play a key role in the nation's economic development.
The causes of malnutrition be it under-nutrition and or over-nutrition are many
that
 complex and have been generally discussed using the conceptual framework
The


categorizes
International
 them into immediate causes, underlying causes and basic causes.
in December
 Conference on Nutrition convened by FAO and WHO in Rome
encouraging,
 1992 aimed at addressing all these causes by identifying and
food consumption
 among others, the use of strategies and actions that would improve
based dietary and nutritional well being. The development and use of foodachieving these
 guidelines have been recommended as a suitable instrument for
give dietary advice
 objectives. Dietary guidelines are sets of advisory statements that
being and to address
 for the population in order to promote overall nutritional well all diet-related conditions (FAO/WHO, 1995).
causes
The food-based guidelines for Nigeria address mainly the immediate of malnutrition which are inadequate dietary intake as well as diseases,
1
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
while also taking into consideration security, inadequate the functions of inadequate household food underlying causes
 maternal and child care and inadequate health services, i.e.
such factors as physical
 of malnutrition. It is in this regard and in view of the roles of activity, smoking, stress and other environmental in the development factors
recommendations
 of these degenerative diseases that some non-dietary were considered appropriate for inclusion in the guidelines.
the poor
These
 and low-income
 guidelines therefore attempt to deal with the nutritional problems of
of frequency, quantity
 groups, thus addressing adequacy of food intake in terms and quality (especially adequacy of energy and protein). It also
excessive
 deals


intakes
with the
 of
 nutritional problems of the affluent middle class, addressing macronutrients (fat, carbohydrate and protein). Specific food-based recommendations have been made for the following groups: Infants 0-6 months
Infants 6-12 months
Toddlers 12-24 months
Children 25-60 months
School-aged children 6-11 years Adolescents 12-18 years
Adults
Pregnant women
Breast-feeding months
The Elderly
Recommendations have also been made in relations to iron, vitamin A and iodine- rich
recommendations
 food intake. In general terms and in everyday nutritional practice, the mean the following:
Breast-feed new born infants exclusively for the first 6 months of life and thereafter continue breast-feeding up to 2 years. In addition, give adequate and nutritiouscomplementary foods from6 months. At every meal, give a variety of foods to ensure adequate diet. Increase consumption of fruits, vegetables, grains and legumes e.g. beans and soyabeans
Increase consumptien of poultry and fish
Use more fats from vegetable sources
Decrease consumption of foods high in animal fat
Decrease consumption of sugar and food high in sugar content
2
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
Decrease consumption of salt and foods high in salt content. Drink water as much as possible daily.
It is hoped that if individuals adopt these guidelines and effect the recommended changes in their diet (by making wise food selections) as well as their lifestyles, morbidity and mortality rates due to malnutrition will be greatly reduced and the chances of long term, good health will be better enhanced.
3
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria References:
1.
2.
3.
NDHS (1990) Nigeria Demographic and Health Surveys, Federal Office of Statistics, Lagos, Nigeria 1990.
OMNI (1993), National Micronutrient Survey, University of Ibadan USAID -Nigeria 1993.
FMHSS (1997) Non-Communicable Disease in Nigeria Series 4. Final Report of a National Survey. Ed Akinkugbe O. O Federal Ministry of
Health and Social Sciences, Lagos, 1997.
4. FGN/UNICEF (1993) The Nutritional Status of Women and Children In Nigeria UNICE/Obafemi Awolowo University Participatory Information Collection (PIC)
5. FAO/WHO (1995) Joint FAO/WHO Technical Report Series 880, 1995
4
2.0
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
JUSTIFICATION FOR USING FOOD-BASED APPROACH
RATHER THAN
RDAS OR RNIS
There are several dietary guidelines and nutritional recommendations, which
populace.
 are being used by policy makers and health professionals for the general Such guidelines and recommendations include RDAs and RNIS, which
recommendations
are expressed in scientific terms and contain quantitative goals and for nutrient intakes. RDAs or RNIs are the levels of intake of
adequate
essential

nutrients
to
 that on the basis of scientific knowledge are judged to be
However, RDAs/RNIs
meet the known nutrient needs of practically all healthy persons.
by
 are commonly misunderstood and applied inappropriately
nutrient
 nutritionists and the public. This is because individuals do not know their true
foods they
 requirements
 eat
 and, their information about actual nutrient content of the is incomplete.
guidance
Food based dietary guidelines (FBDGs) are essentially to provide dietary as well as nutrition education for the general public in terms that are
reach
understandable
 appropriate
 to most consumers. They are practical means of assisting people to nutritional goals.
FBDGs
The

 advantages
are easily of FBDGs are more especially in the Nigerian context. Firstly, comprehensible
than a mere collection since diets are made of foods, which are more
think in terms
 of nutrients and therefore enable the average consumer to
social, cultural,
 of

 foods rather than nutrients. Secondly, foods unlike nutrients, have
FBDGs. Also unlike
ethnic,
 RDAs
 and family meanings, which can be incorporated into
on indirect evidence
 or RNIs, FBDGs advice can be provisional based only
certain diseases. Lastly,
 linking specific food consumption pattern with incidence of
individuals, RDAs (RNIs)
 while FBDGs give broad targets for achievements by
an average individual.
 specify the amount of nutrients to be consumed daily by
3.0 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
The general recommendations aim at ensuring that the different age groups in all segments of the Nigerian population consume adequate amounts of food that contain the nutrients needed to attain and maintain good health. The recommendattons also aim at reducing the growing prevalence of PEM as well as diet-related non-communicable diseases.
3.1 GOOD NUTRITION
No single food by itself (except breast-milk) provides all the nutrients in the right amounts that will promote growth and maintain life. To achieve good nutrition therefore, it is necessary to consume as wide a variety offoods as possible from the age of 6 months.
3.1.1
3.1.2.
INFANTS (0-6 MONTHS)
Start exclusive breast-feeding immediately after birth and continue for 6 months.
There should be no bottle-feeding.
INFANTS (6-12) MONTHS)
Continue breast-feeding
Introduce complementary feeds made from a variety of cereals, tubers, legumes, fruits, animal foods and give with cup and spoon
3.1.3. TODDLERS (12-24 MONTHS)
Continue to breast-feed until child is 2 years
Give enriched pap or mashed foods twice daily
Give family diet made soft with less pepper and spices
Give fruits and vegetables in season.
3.1.4. CHILDREN (25-60 MONTHS)
- Give diet that contains a variety of foods in adequate amounts
Add palm oil or vegetable oil to raise the energy level of complementary foods.
Gradually increase food intake to 4-5 times daily as baby gets older
Provide dark green leafy vegetables, yellow/orange coloured fruits, citrus fruits, cereals, legumes, tubers and foods of animal origin
6
Limit the consumption of sugary food
Continue feeding even when child is ill.
3.1.5 SCHOOL -AGED CHILDREN (6-11 YEARS)
Give diet that contains a variety of foods in adequate amounts
Encourage consumption of good quality snacks, but limit the
consumption of sugary snacks
3.1.6 ADOLESCENTS (12-18 YEARS)
3.1.7
Consume diet containing a variety of foods
Most of the energy should be derived from roots/tubers, legumes,
cereals, vegetables and less from animal foods
An increase in total food intake is very important at this stage, so is the
need to enjoy family meals
Snacks especially pastry and carbonate drinks should not replace
main meals. If you must eat out, make wise food choices.
Liberal consumption of whatever fruits that are in season should be
encouraged.
Females need to eat more iron-containing foods like meat, fish,
poultry, legumes, cereals as well as citrus fruits to enhance body's
use of iron.
ADULTS (MALE AND FEMALE)
Total food intake should take into consideration the level of physical
activity. Individuals who do manual work need to consume more food
than those who do sedentary work.
Limit the fat intake from animal foods
Diet should consist of as wide a variety of foods as possible e.g.
cereals, legumes, roots/tubers, fruits, vegetables, fish, lean meat,
local cheese (wara)
Limit intake of salt, bullion cubes and sugar
Liberal consumption of whatever fruits that are in season is
encouraged.
3.18. PREGNANT WOMEN
Eat diet that contains a variety of foods in adequate amounts
Consume enough food to ensure adequate weight gain
7
3.1.9
sea Dieiaту пишeunes jor rvigera
Eat more of cereals, legumes, fruits, vegetables, dairy products and
animal foods
Take iron and folic acid supplements Avoid alcohol, as prescribed addictive substances and smoking BREAST-FEEDING MOTHERS Eat diet that contains a variety of available food items like cereals,
tubers, legumes, meat, fish, milk, fruits, vegetables, etc.
Consume more of foods rich in iron such as liver, fish, beef, etc.
Eat fruits in season at every meal Consume green leafy vegetables Consume liberally fluids as needed to quench Avoid alcohol, thirst addictive substances and smoking 3.1.10. THE ELDERLY
Eat diets that are prepared from a variety of available foods
cereals, tubers, fruits, vegetables, etc. e.g.
3.2
3.3
Increase consumption of fish and fish-based diets - Eat more of fruits and vegetables Eat more frequently
PHYSICALACTIVITY/EXERCISE Physical activity whether as short periods of intense exercise or prolonged
periods of modest activity on a daily basis generally have beneficial
effects.
Children and adolescents should engage in leisure time exercise
Adults should undertake some form of exercise as recommended by
their doctors.
HEALTHY LIFESTYLES
Some habits and lifestyles e.g. tobacco use and excessive alcohol
consumption have been found Prolonged to be bad for health. indulgence in these lifestyles predisposes to noncommunicable diseases like cancer, diabetes, heart problems, and
hypertension.
8
ALCOHOL
Too much alcohol consumption can lead to risk of hypertension, liver damage,
malnutrition and various cancers. There is also the problem of alcohol abuse.
- If you must drink, take alcohol in moderation
Avoid drinking alcohol when driving a vehicle or operating any machinery.
ТОВАССО
Tobacco use is associated with lung cancers and other chronic disorders.
Smoking during pregnancy can harm the developing baby and can result in low
birth weight babies.
Avoid the use of tabacco in any form
9
4.0
4.1
RECOMMENDATIONS
DIETARY GUIDELINES FOR VARIOUSAGE-GROUPS AGAINST: PROTEN-ENERGY-MALNUTRITION (PEM), MICRONUTRIENT DIFICIENCIES, AND DIET-RELATED NONCOMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
PROTEIN-ENERGY-MALNUTRITION These dietary (PEM) guidelines have been developed for the following age
groups:
* Infants
*
 (0-6 months)
Infants
*
 (6-12 months) Toddlers (12-24 *
 months) Children (25-60 *
 months)
School-aged children (6-11 years) * Adolescents (12-18 *
 years) Adults
* Pregnant
*
 Women
*
4.1.1
Breast-feeding Mothers The Elderly
INFANTS (0-6 Months) Start breast-feeding immediately
Breast-feed after birth exclusively up to 6 months i.e. with no other foods/milk Do not give any other drinks e.g. water, gbomoro, agbo, honey, glucose
drink etc, during the first 6 months Breast-feed on demand both day and night Breast-feed low birth weight babies (less than 2.5kg at birth) more
frequently.
4.1.2 INFANTS (6- 12 MONTHS) Continue to breast-feed as often as possible Give baby semi-solid foods twice a day and gradually increase to 4-5 times
daily as baby gets older.
Start feeding baby with semi-solid foods from usual family meals such as:
Pap made from corn, guinea corn, millet, acha, etc. i.e. Kamu, Akamu,
10
4.1.3.
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
Ogi; Mashed foods e.g. yam, potatoes, rice, plantain, de-hauled beans etc
Mix pap or mashed foods with the following:
Growth - promoting foods e.g. fish, crayfish, milk (if available) groundnuts, benniseed, soyabean powder, beans;
Fruits e.g. mashed banana, pawpaw or strained and diluted orange juice
Vegetables (cooked and mashed) and
Palm oil.
Feed baby with cup/plate and spoon. Do not use feeding bottles and pacifiers.
TODDLERS (12 24 months)
Continue to breast-feed until child is 2 years old
Give enriched pap or mashed foods twice daily (e.g. with crayfish, logroundnuts)
NOTE:
Additionally at meal times, give family diet made soft and with less pepper and spices
Give nutritious snacks at least twice daily (e.g. Kuli-kuli, Akara, carrots, banana, wara)
Give fruits and vegetables in season.
Remember that feeding young children needs patience
Take children for regular growth monitoring and promotion sessions
Report any health problem to nearest health facility
Provide adequate care and friendly surrounding e.g. smiling, playing, and eating with children
Make sure baby takes all vaccinations.
4.1.4 CHILDREN (25-60 MONTHS)
Give usual family foods *3-5 times daily)
Give more growth - promoting foods e.g. beans, fish, meat, milk and egg (if available)
- Give nutritious snacks in-between meals
Give fruits and vegetables in season
*
See guidelines for adults zilube tot z9rila
11
NOTE
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria Use unbleached
teaspoon
 palm oil for cooking more frequently or add a
 to food whenever palm oil is not used.
Continue attending Growth Monitoring and Promotion Sessions Keep food, body and surrounding clean Remember baby needs love and care
Avoid use ofunprescribed drugs and medications De-worm children regularly.
4.1.5 SCHOOL AGED CHILDREN (6-11 years)
NOTE
Continue feeding with usual adequate family diet Give more growth-promoting foods e.g. beans, fish, meat, milk and egg (if available)
Establish healthy feeding habits by having regular family meals* Prepare
services
 meals for the child to eat at school, if there are no school meal
Encourage consumption
wara, kuli-kuli etc.
 of nutritious snacks in form of fruits, groundnuts,
Monitor the child's food choice/feeding
De-worm habits and correct where necessary the child from time to time
Report any ill health to the nearest health facility.
4.1.6. ADOLESCENTS (12-18 Years)
tubers,
Eat adequate diet prepared from available food items such as cereals, fruits, vegetables, meat, fish, milk etc. Establish healthy eating habits by having regular family meals
including
Increase the
 snacks)
 amount of food eaten and the frequency (e.g. 4-5 meals a day
Take iron supplements as prescribed (for the adolescent girl) Snacks
meals.

Ifyou
especially pastry and carbonated drinks should not replace main must eat out, make wise food choices
encouraged.
Liberal consumption of whatever fruits that are in season should be
See guidelines for adults
12
NOTE:
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
. Avoid tobacco, alcohol and any form of unprescribed
drugs/medication.
4.1.7. ADULTS (MALE & FEMALE)
-
-
Eat adequate diet prepared from available food items
Eat varied diet at least 3 times daily and enough to satisfy hunger
Use unbleached palm oil in preparing meals
Eat more melon seeds, soyabeans, beans, locust beans, crayfish,
groundnuts
Use vegetable oil more frequently
Establish healthy eating habits by having regular family meals
Avoid over eating
Minimize adding salt and bullion cubes to foods
Avoid adding salt to foods after cooking (at table)
Consume liberal amounts of green leafy vegetables even during dry
season.lisma.del
Consume liberal amounts of fruits in season.
NOTE:
Avoid use of tobaссо
If you must drink, take alcohol in moderation
Avoid all forms of unprescribed drugs and substances
Adults should undertake some form of exercise as recommended by
their doctors.
4.1.8. PREGNANT WOMEN
-
Eat adequate diet composed of a variety of available food items like
cereals, tubers, legumes, fruits, vegetables, meat, milk, fish, etc.
Increase the quantity/amount of food by 1/10 of what you usually eat
before pregnancy especially after 6 months
Establish healthy feeding habits by having regular family meals
Eat iron and folate-rich foods like beef, liver, fish, pumpkin seeds and
leaves, snails, nuts, etc.
Take the routine prescribed iron/folate tablets.
hubo o zails
13
NOTE:
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
Avoid completely use of tobacco and alcohol
Use only prescribed drugs and medications
Space your birth to at least 2 years in between
Attend regular Antenatal Clinics
Report unusual feeling/ill health to nearest health facility
Minimize heavy workload.
4.1.9. BREAST-FEEDING MOTHER
Eat adequate diet composed of a variety of available food items like cereals, tubers, legumes, fruits, vegetables, meat, milk, fish, etc. Increase the quantity/amount of food by 1/5 ofwhat you usually eat before pregnancy
Eat fruits in season at each meal
Consume liberal amounts of green leafy vegetables e.g. pumpkin leaves, seeds and spinach
Eat more of foods rich in iron such as beef, liver, fish, snails, etc.
NOTE:
4.1.10.
-
Take the routine prescribed iron/folate tablets.
Breast-feed baby exclusively
Have adequate rest
Avoid tobacco and alcohol
Minimize heavy work load and exercise
THE ELDERLY
Eat adequate amounts of foods prepared from a variety of available foods e.g. cereals, tubers, fruits, vegetables, meat, milk
Eat more of fruits and vegetables
Increase consumption of fish and fish-based diets
Increase consumption of fermented semi-solid foods e.g. kunu, soyabean enriched pap, enriched agidi
Eat more frequently
* See guidelines for adults
14
NOTE:
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
Avoid tobacco and if you must drink, limit intake of alcohol Engage in family and community-based social activities Maintain usual activity/exercise
Avoid isolation
Encourage regular medical check up and report any ill health.
d of duuno
15
4.2 MICRONUTRIENTS
Micronutrients are substances that are needed in small amounts by the
body. They perform vital roles in growth, reproduction, brain function
and resistance to disease amount others. These guidelines are
provided to ensure adequate intake of micronutrients by the general
populace.
4.2.1 IRON
Iron is a very important micronutrient, the lack of which can lead to
anaemia. Generally, there are two forms of dietary iron:
Iron from animal sources which are readily used by the body and
Iron from plant sources
Iron-containing foods include; Liver, Meat, Fish, Snails, Pumpkin leaves
and seeds, Legumes, Nuts, etc.
NOTE:
Fresh fruits such as guava, African cherry (Agbalumo/udala),
oranges and other citrus fruits contain Vitamin C. When consumed
with meals, vitamin C aids body's use of i pecially if animal
foods like liver, meat, fish and poultry are lac
Consumption of tea or coffee with me
because these beverages hinder the use of ir
4.2.1.1 INFANTS (0-6 MONTHS)
Breast-feed exclusively up to 6 months.
4.2.1.2 INFANTS (6-12 MONTHS)
Continue to breast-feed as often as possible
!be discourged
Introduce gradually nutritious complementary food such as pap mixed
with groundnut or crayfish
Give baby semi-solid foods from usual family meals
Start feeding semi-solid foods twice a day and gradually increase to 4-5
times daily as baby gets older.
Iron-rich foods like meat or liver should be introduced as early as possible.
Give strained fruit juices made from citrus fruits like orange, tangerine
etc.
4.2.1.3 TODDLERS (12 -24 MONTHS)
Continue to breast-feed until child is 2 years old
16
Give enriched pap or mashed foods
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
Give food from family diet made soft and with less pepper and spices. Increase the frequency of giving iron-rich foods like meat, liver, fish, etc. Give fresh fruits and vegetables in season with meals.
4.2.1.4 СHILDREN (25-60 MONTHS)
Give food from family menu which should contain iron-rich foods like meat, fish, green leafy vegetables, etc. Give nutritious snacks in between meals
Give fruits and vegetables in season with meals De-worm at regular intervals.
4.2.1.5 SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN (6-11 YEARS)
Continue feeding withusual family diet Give varied diet at least 3 times daily and just enough to satisfy hunger Establish healthy feeding habits by having regular family meals
fruits
Encourage the consumption of snacks made from iron-rich foods and
Give fruits and vegetables in season with meals
4.2.1.6 ADOLESCENTS ESPECIALLYTHE GIRL(12-18YEARS)
consumption
The adolescent girl should make efforts to increase her iron stores through
needs
 of iron - rich foods. However, in situations of increased iron
tablets.
it


This
may be necessary to supplement with prescribed iron/folate
reproductive
 is necessary to prepare the adolescent girl for her future roles.
Eat varied diet at least 3 times daily and enough to satisfy hunger Establish health, feeding habits by having regular family meals Eat more of iron-containing foods such as liver, meat,fish
with
Take


meals.
fresh fruits in season such as guava, mangoes, oranges, etc. liberally
4.2.1.7 ADULTS (MALE AND FEMALE)
Eat
leaves,
 more
 etc.
 of iron-rich foeds such as liver, fish, meat, pumpkin seeds and
Eat more fruits and vegetables
17
NOTE:
Avoid taking tea or coffee with meals
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for ivigera
4.2.1.8 PREGNANT WOMEN
NOTE:
Adult females should increase iron stores through consumption of ironrich foods
Eat sufficient amounts of iron-containing foods like liver, organ meats,
meat, fish, poultry, pumpkin seeds and leaves, nuts, legumes, dark green
leafy vegetables.
Take fresh fruits in season such as guava, mangoes, oranges, etc. liberally
with meals.
.
Take iron and folic acid supplementation as prescribed
Take medicine to control malaria as prescribed
Report any illness to the nearest health facility
Avoid taking tea or coffee with meals
Avoid use of tobaссо
4.2.1.9 BREAST-FEEDING MOTHERS
Build iron stores through regular consumption of iron-rich foods such as
liver, fish, meat, pumpkin etc.
Take fresh fruits in season with meals
NOTE:
Take iron and folic acid supplementation as prescribed
Take medicine to control malaria as prescribed
Report any illness to the nearest health facility
Avoid taking tea or coffee with meals
Avoid use of tobaссо
4.1.1.10 THE ELDERLY
Eat more of iron-rich foods such as liver, fish, meat, pumpkin seeds and
leaves, etc.
Eat more fruits and vegetables
18
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
NOTE:
Take iron and folic acid supplementation as prescribed
4.2.2
Take medicine to control malaria as prescribed
Report any illness to the nearest health facility
Avoid taking tea or coffee with meals
Avoid use of tobacсо
VITAMINA
Vitamin A is needed for proper functioning of the eyes, resistance to
diseases and growth promotion in children. Its absence can lead to
blindness, poor growth and reproduction and even death.
These guidelines are to ensure adequate intake of vitamin A to prevent
problems associated with its deficiency.
Foods such as liver, milk, fish, butter, local cheese (wara) have appreciable
quantities of vitamin A.
The following fruits and vegetables can also ensure enough quantity of
vitamin A when regularly consumed: green leafy vegetables, carrots,
pumpkin pawpaw, mangoes, red palm oil (unbleached), sweet potatoes
(yellow variety).
4.2.2.1 INFANT (0 -6 MONTHS)
Feed baby colostrums i.e. the first milk from mothers breast after delivery,
it is rich in vitamin A.
Exclusive breast-feeding for the first 6 months of life will provide enough
quantity of vitamin Aneeded for healthy growth
4.2.2.2 INFANTS (6 - 12 MONTHS)
Continue breast-feeding
Introduce vitamin A rich foods like liver, mashed pawpaw, strained citrus
fruit juice, etc
Use unbleached palm oi! in cooking and also add a teaspoon to the baby's
pap or mashed food, if palm oil was not used in cooking.
4.2.2.3 ТODDLERS (12-24 MONTHS)
Enrich family foods with milk, liver, ground crayfish, soft pawpaw, soft
carrots
Use palm oil in cooking
19
4.2.2.4 СHILDREN (25-60 MONTHS)
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
Give some amounts of liver, milk, dark green leafy vegetables with every
meal
Use palm oil in cooking
Give mangoes, pawpaw, carrots, etc. as snacks.
4.2.2.5. SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN (6-11 YEARS)
Use
Give
 palm
 foods
 oil
 rich in vitamin A-liver, milk, dark green leafy vegetables in cooking
Give snacks like mangoes, pawpaw, carrots
4.2.2.6 ADOLESCENTS (12-18 YEARS) Encourage the consumption of more vitamin A-rich foods like liver, fish, milk, meat to meet the demands or growth and development. Encourage the consumption of meals prepared with vitamin A-rich foods Yellow/orange coloured fruits such as pawpaw, mangoes, should be
consumed liberally to build up vitamin Encourage A stores in the body. the consumption of dark-green leafy vegetables like spinach and yellow/orange coloured vegetables Eat like carrots. foods cooked with unbleached palm oil.
4.2.2.7 ADULTS (MALE AND FEMALE)
4.2.2.8
-
Eat meals prepared with vitamin A-rich foods Consume yellow/orange coloured fruits like pawpaw, mangoes, Use unbleached palm liberally oil in cooking Consume liberally dark-green leafy vegetables like spinach and yellow/orange coloured vegetables like carrots.
PREGNANT WOMEN
Eat
Eat
 fruits
 more

vitamin
such as mangoes,
 A-rich foods (liver, milk, meat) than when not pregnant pawpaw, pumpkin, regularly Use palm oil in cooking
Consume liberally dark-green leafy vegetables like spinach and yellow/orange coloured vegetable like carrots.
20
4.2.2.9 BREAST-FEEDING MOTHERS
-
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
Eat more vitamin A-rich foods -liver, milk, meat, etc
Eat generous amounts of fruits such as mangoes, pawpaw and pumpkin
Use unbleached palm oil in cooking
Consume liberally dark-green leafy vegetables like spinach and
yellow/orange coloured vegetables like carrots.
4.2.2.10 THE ELDERLY
NOTE:
4.2.3
Eat meals prepared with vitamin A-rich foods
Consume fruits like pawpaw, mangoes, liberally
Use unbleached palm oil in cooking
Consume liberally dark-green leafy vegetables like spinach and
yellow/orange coloured vegetables like carrots
. In areas where vitamin A defficiency is of public health concern,
vitamin A supplementation under supervision should be considered.
IODINE
Iodine is a very important micronutrient. It is necessary for growth,
proper functioning of the thyroid and ensuring normal brain development. Deficiency of iodine can lead to among others; goiter, reduced growth and
reversible brain damage. These guidelines suggest ways of ensuring adequate iodine intake by all segments of the population.
Foods that are rich in iodine include: fish (not fresh water fish), crabs, shrimps/prawns, edible seaweed (kelp)
4.2.3.1 INFANTS (0-6 MONTHS)
Breast-feed exclusively
4.2.3.2 INFANTS (6- 12 MONTHS)
Continue breast-feeding
Add ground shrimps, prawns to complementary foods
Give food from family menu cooked with iodized salt.
4.2.3.3 TODDLERS (12-24 MONTHS)
Continue breast-feeding
21
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria Continue to give meals containing sea-foods such as crab, fish, shrimps, etc.
Give meals from family food cooked with iodized salt.
4.2.3.4 CHILDREN (25-60 MONTHS)
Seafood such as crabs, fish, shrimps should be regular components of family menu.
Eat meals prepared from family food cooked with iodized salt.
4.2.3.5 SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN (6-11 YEARS) Seafood such as crabs, fish, shrimps should continue to be a regular component of family menu
Eat meals prepared with iodized salt
4.2.3.6 ADOLESCENTS (12-18 YEARS) Consumption of iodine-rich foods such as fish, shrimps, crab etc should be encouraged
Eat foods cooked with iodized salt
4.2.3.7 ADULTS (MALE AND FEMALE) Consume regularly iodine-rich
Use foods such as fish, crabs etc. iodized salt in cooking.
4.2.3.8 PREGNANT WOMEN
Consume regularly iodine-rich
Seafood foods such as fish, shrimps, etc.
pregnancy.
 like fish, crabs, shrimps should be consumed more than before
Use iodized salt in cooking
4.2.3.9 BREAST-FEEDING MOTHERS
Seafood should feature prominently in the diet Use iodized salt in cooking
4.2.3.10 THE ELDERLY
Seafood should feature prominently in the diet Use iodized salt in cooking
22
=Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
4.3
INTRODUCTION
DIET-RELATED DISEASES
Recent studies have shown that over-nutrition with resultant diet-related
diseases is gradually becoming a public health problem in Nigeria. Dietary
guidelines have therefore been developed for the following emerging diet-related
diseases in our society:
Cardiovascular Diseases
Diabetes mellitus
Obesity
4.3.1 CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES
Cardiovascular diseases are diseases that affect the heart and blood vessels.
These can manifest in form of hypertension, high blood pressure, high blood
cholesterol, stroke and other heart problems. Many factors predispose to these
conditions including high fat intake and obesity. It is therefore desirable to
maintain body weight appropriate for age and size (height) by controlling the intake
of the following foods:
USE
FATTY FOODS
Fish: low fat fish like tilapia
stock-fish etc, lean meat,
chicken/turkey without
skins, snails, game (bush
meat)
DAIRY PRODUCTS
skimmed milk, low-fat
cheese and yoghurt
REDUCE-IN-TAKE
Fatty meat/fish such as hump
(tozo), tongue, cow tail, skin
(ponmo), bacon sausage,
hamburger, mackerel
Full-cream evaporated milk,
fat, butter, cheese,
Condensed full - cream milk,
full cream powdered milk.
AVOID
Organ meat like liver,
kidney, brain (kwanya),
intestine
FATS/OILS
Corn oil, sunflower oil
Soyabean oil and
Groundnut oil
Oils rich in saturated fats e.g.
palm oil, coconut oil, palm
kernel oil, lard, chicken fat,
Turkey fat, pear (Ube)
Ogbona etc.
Coconut
23
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines USE/TAKE for Nigeria
FRIED FOODS
REDUCE IN-TAKE AVOID Fried foods, e.g. puff-puff, doughnut, chin-chin, etc.
BAKED PRODUCTS Pastries such as meat pie, sausage roll's, chocolate
cookies, Cakes FRUITS
Oranges, grapefruits and tangerine
SOLUBLE FIBRECONTAINING FOODS
Cowpeas, beans, broad beans, pigeon peas etc. STARCHY FOODS/
CEREALS
Yam, cassava, plantain
(green), rice, guinea corn, whole wheat, maize, millet,
etc.
SUGARY FOODS
SALT
Bambara nuts, groundnuts, soyabeans.
Refined (processed) food such as semovita, corn-vita,
banking flour, spaghetti,
macaroni noodles etc.
Refined sugar and foods:- Containing added sugar.
Cooking Salt
Avocado,
Sweetened carbonated
drinks (soft drinks) jam, marmalade.
Salty foods such as
corned-beef, sardine,
bullion cubes and MSG
(Mono-sodium
glutamate) salted fish/
meat.
Adding of salt to
cooked food at tables
24
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
USE/TAKE REDUCE IN-TАKE AVOID
ALCOHOL Alcohol e.g Ogogoro,
Palm wine, gin sherry
Champagne, alcoholic
Wines, beer, stout etc.
TOBACCO Tobacco, Cigarettes,
Cigar, snuff
NOTE:
4.3.2
Cook or boil food instead of frying
Ifhypertensive, reduce salt intake to the barest minimum
The following simple exercises are encouraged and can be used in weight control by people with cardiovascular problems. Strolling, brisk walking, jogging, skipping, swimming, climbing stairs, gardening, tennis, squash (not less than 20 minutes. exercise 3 times a
week). For middle aged adults these exercises should be based on medical advice.
DIABETES MELLITUS
This is a disorder in which the blood sugar level is higher than normal, and is often associated with obesity, hypertension and cardiovascular diseases. For this reason, the dietary guidelines for diabetes mellitus have taken into consideration the effects of the associated disorders.
USE
STARCHY FOODS
Whole grain e.g. maize,
Millet, guinea corn, acha,
roots/tubers e.g. water
Yam, Irish potatoes, bitter
Yam (esuru) plantain
(unripe)
REDUCE IN-TAKE AVOID
Yam, cassava (Akpu, fufu),
highly refined flour products
such as semolina, cassava flour.
Sweet potatoes, ripe
plantain, banana
25
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines USE for Nigeria
SUGARY FOODS
Fresh diluted fruit juices especially lemon/lime
juice, unsweetened tea
REDUCE IN-TAKE
Baked beans, tomato
ketchup
AVOID
Sugarcane, honey, dates
(debino) sugarcane sweet
(Alewa) soft drinks, Ice Creams, lolly pops, cocоabased beverages, candies.
Sweets marmalades jellies,
Chocolate bars, coffee if
VEGETABLES hypertensive
Green leafy vegetable
with every meal. Fresh
vegetable-based salads,
garden egg leaves,
Squeeze-washed bitterleaves. Vegetable soup,
garden eggs, cucumber as snacks.
Thickened soup e.g.
Ukpo, Achi, Akparata,
Ofo, Cowpea, pumpkin
(Kebewa), etc.
FATTY FOODS
Fish-Low fat fish e.g.
tilapia, stockfish/cod. Lean
meat e.g. chicken/turkey
without skin, snail, gąme (bush meat)
DAIRY PRODUCTS
Skimmed milk, low fat
Cheese, yoghurt
Starchy thickeners used in
preparing soups, such as
cocoyam, yam, flour, starch
gari, etc.
Fatty meat/fish such as hump (tozo), tongue, cowtail,
intestine, skin ponmo,
bacon, sausage, hamburger, mackerel
Full cream evaporated milk,
cheese, condensed full
cream milk, full cream
powdered milk.
Organ meats like
liver, kidney, brain
(Kwanya)
Butter, ice-cream
26
USE/TAKE
FATS/OILS
Corn oil, sunflower oil,
Soyebean oil, groundnut
oil, margarine
FRUITS
One or two portions of
Fruits a day. At leasttwo
of the fruits in season
once or twice a day like
oranges, guava, mangoes
REDUCE IN-TAKЕ
Oils rich in saturated
fats e.g. palm oil,
coconut oil, palm
Kernel oil
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
AVOID
Fats from animal
sources e.g. lard,
butter, chicken fat
turkey fat.
Avocad pear, African
pear (Ube), coconut.
SALT
ALCOHOL/
ТОВАССО
NOTE:
Salt in cooking Salty foods, such as
Corned beef, sardine etc,
bullion cubes, (móno
sodium glutamate in
order to reduce salt
intake). Adding salt to
cooked food at table
Alcohol, smoking
Ifhypertensive, reduce salt intake to the barest minimum
The following simple exercises are encouraged and can be used in
weight control in diabetic subject. Exercises such as: brisk walking, swimming, cycling, dancing (all exercises should not be less than 20 minutes, 3 times a week)
All exercises should be under medical supervision
Can have carbonated drink (soda water) but if hypertensive should consult the doctor or physician
Always remember to take drugs if on insulin and oralhypoglycemic
Please consult a dietician: for the specific amounts of food that should be consumed if on insulin injection.
27
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria 4.3.3 OBESITY
Obesity is a condition in which an individual's body weight in relation to his/her height is above that which is desirable for good health. These dietary guidelines encourage obese individuals to adopt eating habits that will lead to gradual weight loss. The guidelines are so simple that if adhered to, can become a way of life.
TOTAL FOOD INTAKE
It is desirable to maintain body weight appropriate for age and size by controlling total food intake. Water intake may be increased for example to control appetite. Also the amounts of food eaten at each meal could be reduced. In addition, second helpings (extra food) during mealtime should be avoided.
USE
STARCHY FOODS
Whole grains like corn,
millet, guinea corn; roots
and tubers e.g. yam,
Cocoyam, cassava, etc.
SUGARY FOODS
REDUCE IN-TAKE
Refined cereals and tubers
such as wheat flour, cassava
flour (elubo) yam flour etc.
AVOID
Pastries such as buns,
puff-puff, meat pie,
cakes, etc.
Fresh unsweetened
diluted fruits juice
especially lemon/lime,
Unsweetened carbonated
water e.g. soda water
Baked beans, tomato
ketchup, canned fruits
and juices
LEGUMES/NUTS
Foods containing soluble
fibre such as beans,
soyabeans flour
Nuts such as coconut,
Groundnut, palm kernel nuts
Sugar cane, honey, date
(debino), sugar cane
sweet (Alewa), soft
drink, chocolate drinks,
Ice-creams, lolly pops, Cocoa-based
beverages, candies,
sweets, marmalades,
jam,jellies and
chocolate bars.
28
USE/TAKE
VEGETABLES
More vegetables at each
Meal. Eat garden eggs,
garden egg leaves,
cucumber, carrots, fresh
vegetable salad, and green
vegetables, including
squeeze washed bitter
leaves and zogale leaves.
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
REDUCE IN-TAKE AVOID
FRUITS
One or two portions of
fruits daily like oranges
grapefruits, any fruits in
seasons.
FATTY FOODS
Fish-Low fat fish such as
Tilapia, stockfish and
Sawa; lean meat, chicken/
Turkey without skin, snail,
Games (bush meat)
DAIRY PRODUCTS
Skimmed milk, low-fat
cheese and low-fat
yoghurt
Fatty meat/fish such as
hump (tozo), tongue
cowtail, intestine, skin
(ponmo), bacon,
sausage, hamburger,
mackerel.
Full cream evaporated milk,
Condensed milk including
local cheese (wara) full cream
Powerdered milk
Avocado pear and
African pear (Ube)
Organ meats like liver
kidney, brain (Kwanya),
egg ifblood cholesterol
is high
Animal fat butter
FATS/OILS
Corn oil, sunflower oil,
soyabean oil, groundnut
oil, margarine
ALCOHOL/
ТОВАССО
Oils rich in Saturated
fats e.g. palm oil
coconut oil, Palm
Kernel oil
Fats from animal
source e. g.
chicken, turkey, lards
and butter
Drinking alcohol,
smoking tobacco
29
NOTE:
Cook and boil food instead of frying
Food-Based Dietary Guidelines for Nigeria
Exercise regularly (at least for 20 minutes Exercises 3 times per week) such as: brisk walking, swimming, climbing stairs, skipping and jogging (for older children, adolescents and Young adults) will help you loose weight.
Ensure regular weight monitoring
For properly planned diet, please consult your dietician
ADDITIONALTIPS
Weight recycling frequent fluctuation in body weight and skipping of
meals are not desirable.
Sit down - Train yourself to eat while sitting e.g. on mats or at table. It is easy to overeat when meals are grabbed on the run. Slow down - Eat slowly enough to give your body time to release the enzyme
Do
 that tells your brain when you have had all you need. not give up - Failing in your diet once or twice does not mean the effort is hopeless. Simply acknowledge that you overate. Get back to plan.
Reward yourself- Treat yourself with a special favourite snack for each week that you maintain your new weight (when desired weight is reached).
30